So something typical of Stargardt's disease is that, um, the individual has no central vision. So like, literally, in the middle of my eyes, I see a dot, like a blank, a black circle, or a black spot. And, um, people with Stargardt's disease have more peripheral vision, so more vision as, you know, towards the outside.

uh, outskirts of their visual field and no vision right in the middle, right in the center. And then, so this is a genetic condition. On the other hand, there's another genetic condition, for example, called retinitis pigmentosa, which is the opposite. That's like tunnel vision. So you can only see right through the center of your vision and you can't see on the outside.

So you, like, if you look straight, you have no idea what's on your left. You have no idea what's on your right. You can only see what's right in front of you.  Some people are okay with dim light and they don't like very bright spaces. And some people don't like both. You know, there's some office buildings, especially like, let's say Manhattan, where they have large floor to ceiling windows, white walls, white floor, and I'm looking for the, like, reception desk, which is also white, like, it's a very, like, corporate, uh, Kind of office building and that, you know, the sun is shining.

It's a nice bright day. The sun is coming in through the window. It's there's a lot of like reflection happening on the white. It's also like some people also, when there's snow on the ground, it's harder for them to see when it's a sunny day, like the sun is reflecting off the snow and creating a lot of glare.

So I also don't like those kinds of places. It's like, Ooh, so hard to see. There's a lot of reflection, a lot of bright light. It's very, very loud. There's a dim lighting, usually like blinking lights, colorful lights,  um, uh, a lot of noise. So it's like also not just hard to see, but it's also hard to hear. I don't get much pleasure from going to zoos.

Like I'll listen to the information if somebody's talking about it, or sometimes they have those like signs describing the animal.  Movie theaters are really good now. A lot of movies now, I would say like. 75 percent of them  have, um, audio description,  so like Netflix, Disney,  I think if you go into if you just pick like a Netflix movie or show, um,  you go into what is it?

I forget now accessibility or something. And you turn on. Audio description, not changing the language, not the closed captioning, um, but the audio description,  and then, uh, it'll start describing,  um, you'll hear the dialogue, but then it'll also be like a narrator, someone describing what's going on, um, on the screen. 

It's called Be My AI.  It is a really good app that is utilizing AI technology for describing photos. To blind people. So you can take a picture of the room or, you know, a screenshot, if it's something on your phone. And then be my AI gave so much detail about what was happening in the room to what people were wearing, to how many people were in the room, to what did the ceiling look like, what did the walls look like, was it dimly lit?

Was it brightly lit? Like it, it gave so much detail. Be my eyes is an app that has. registered volunteers. So you can call a volunteer. Let's say I'm trying to, uh, I don't know, like cook something. I'll make a pancake and I want to read the recipe on the box of the pancake mix.  Um, so you can use be my eyes.

You can, uh, call an actual person, a volunteer who will pick up your call and then answer your question about, you know, Hey, I have this box. Of pancake mix. I'm trying to read the instructions of how to make it. Can you please read it to me? Seeing AI, that one's not a live person. That one's, um, utilizes the phone camera and like accessibility features.

It's not an actual person. There's one, I think it's still in beta and that's only on iOS called OCO, like O K O is for. Helping people understand whether it's, uh, to help cross the street, whether the light is red or green,  not every employer wants to hire blind people. Um, so like I said, when we go to these different networking events,  we go to job fairs  because when employers are looking to fill a position,  there's a couple of things that employers want.

They want somebody who's hardworking, who's talented, who can do the job with an appropriate amount of training.  Um, they are looking for someone who will stay in the job. They're not looking for someone who's going to leave in six, seven months,  and then they have to find somebody new all over again because that is more expensive for companies.

The retention rate of people with disabilities versus people without disabilities is much higher  because it is harder for people with disabilities  to find new jobs as well. So that is attractive to employers.  And then a lot of concern of employers as well. How, how expensive are the accommodations going to be?

What am I going to have to spend for this person to be able to do their job? First of all, the average cost  of  getting accommodations for a person with a disability is 500 and that information. is available to you through online, through, um, the job accommodations network. And they have determined the average cost  of an accommodation is 500.

Sometimes the cost can be, I don't know, 10. Like, let's say if a visually impaired person, they just need a little bit of extra light.  You just get them a desk lamp, just a regular  desk lamp, and  that will give them more light on their desk.  Sometimes the cost is zero dollars. Uh, somebody with a visual impairment, if their computer  is next to a window,  And the windows, you know, there's a lot of sun sunlight  creating a glare or reflection on the computer screen.

And it's difficult for them to see the computer screen. They can just say, can I sit somewhere else or can I close the blinds? Um, sometimes there are more expensive accommodations, like the one that's the best one on the market, which is made by freedom scientific, that one costs over a thousand dollars.

To make it attractive for employers, we tell them like, if this is too much of a cost for you, we can work with the New York state commission for the blind and they will pay, they will buy  the accommodation for that person if it is too expensive for the company.  So I think they're like called sortation centers or for fulfillment centers, one of those two terms. 

Um, so I think there's like two in Queens, there's.  The biggest one, biggest ones, multiple in the country are on Staten Island. There's like over a hundred blind people working in just in New York at those Amazon warehouses now. Visions  back in 2000, I think it was 18.  Um, my manager actually, Heather started this, uh,  Uh, journey, I would say, um, now Amazon has a whole  accommodations team only for blind people.

Like in New York, they hire,  um,  our staff, or in some cases,  you know, they're like, Hey, we just hired a blind person. They need training. They need to learn to  walk around the warehouse safely. So, uh, you know, they'll even pay us.  To, to do that. So  there's a lot of accommodations that we have worked  with Amazon to put in place where, and those warehouses are huge, huge warehouses.

They have robots running around a lot of assembly lines, like packages, like carts, things just going around. It's, it's crazy in there, but there are blind people working there. Helping, you know, the process of your package, getting to. eventually your home. So that is one job. I would say 10 years ago, somebody would have thought, how can a blind person do this?

Some of those, uh, labels on the package, they need to be scanned.  Um, but you need to know what is on the label when you're scanning, or when you scan it, you need to know what information is on the label. So if you can't see it,  the scanner is linked to a device that talks.  And  that talking device based on the barcode on the label  will give you information about what, whatever information it has on it,  so that  that is there Now, I think that was put into place in 2020  21, something like that.

Um, they have, you know, a major concern, like how does,  how will a blind person know how to get from the front door of. The warehouse to their specifics, like area where they're working.  So we worked with Amazon to say, to figure out, there's actually a tape, like a, it's called a tactile tape that can be put down from the front door, let's say, to  wherever the person's workstation is, and they can use their cane to feel the tape and follow it like a pass.

They have something called a green mile, which runs through the center of the warehouse and goes all the way through and that green mile is supposed to stay clear of  people and traffic like nothing can stand there and block that way. That's like a central walking part so people have to keep moving.

Nothing can like be parked there and nobody can leave their stuff there and nobody can leave boxes there. It has to be a clear path. So the green mile is the safest way. To get through and like follow the tactile tape with your cane and walk over to your, to your workstation. Disadvantage is that if that's what a person is relying on, they're sort of just going back and forth from, you know, the break room to the bathroom, to their workstation, to the exit.

They're not like walking around the whole warehouse. So not every job in the Amazon warehouse is accessible for a blind person, but there are some jobs. With the right technology that can be made accessible.