I'm Tiesha Ortiz. I am the Senior Director of Social Work with Visions. I've been with Visions for almost two years now. I've been a social worker for over 25 years. I've been a therapist for almost five years. Um, but bulk of my experience prior to working with Visions was in working with adults with mental health challenges.

and housing. So I worked a lot with, um, nonprofit housing  providers. Uh, that was where a bulk of my social work experience was prior to moving to Visions. Human behavior states that we learn through modeling. Most of our learning happens  Um, you know, it's, it's, it's through modeling. Someone smiles. You smile back  something that simple.

Even babies do it. They say babies don't really smile because they know what happy is. They smile because most adults smile at them and then they smile back.  Right. So I was social cues, even from as infancy stage are usually learned through modeling behavior. People who are blind or visually impaired have to learn differently.

They must be sort of verbally guided through things  or explained things.  So sometimes they'll have, or they're used to having someone in the room who's sort of an ally and will say, you know, um, let's say if somebody is giving a lecture or, um, a presentation, they'll say some of the people in the room are smiling.

Some of the people in the room are nodding their heads in agreeance. Some of the people have their hands raised, you know, you have some questions that. You may need to answer. So there's things that, that, um, that happen in that way for the working adults. It would vary on what their needs are, depending on their visual ability.

We provide a wide array of services regarding social work. If you think about the person who let's say is newly blind.  Which would be, we would consider to be adventitiously blind, meaning something occurred to cause the blindness later in life. They were not congenitally, what we would call congenitally blind, which means that they were born with the visual impairment.

Those who are adventitiously blind are usually referred to us Um, and I'm wondering how can I get services by the, the New York state commission for the blind, or maybe some sort of other community organization in which they were connected to, or they're caught on their own. You know, I've, I've had a recent loss in vision or my vision has decreased.

And I'm wondering how can I get services because our services are free. Once we get them connected to New York state commission for the blind. However, in order to get connected to them, you have to fit. The legal requirements, we have to meet the legal requirements to be legally blind, which most people think, well, if I have problems seeing, does that mean that I'm blind?

No, there's a, there's an actual number, um, that represents legal blindness. And so once you've been, once you've gotten a report completed by your, either your.  Doctor, your regular PCP, primary care physician or ophthalmologist, optometrist,  um, any one of those can fill out this eye report form to show whether this person is legally blind.

If so, then they're connected with commission and all our services are free.  Now, the services that we provide specifically in the social work department can work, go from benefits, right? What type of benefits am I entitled to as a person? Who is blind or visually impaired that can include transportation benefits like access a ride.

Uh, you know, maybe the person is still working and now they were used to driving, but now they can't. They can no longer drive, so we want to get them connected to what type of ride sharing or transportation services are available within New York City.  Um, so that's usually access arrived and then. After transportation, there's usually financial.

Uh, benefits, meaning  maybe they were working full time and now they can only work part time, or maybe the loss of their visual impairment means they can't. Do the essential job functions anymore. Right. And so now they're looking into applying for either, um, social security, disability income, or SSI, or anything that falls under the umbrella of the human resources administration temporarily until they get some sort of SSI or SSDI.

So we had them get connected to things like that.  Uh, we help them get connected to support groups. Different types of support groups for people who are blind or visually impaired, depending on the age group, because we do work from birth, which means we would work with the families to support the blind child, or we would work with anywhere from, you know, children in elementary school age, high school age, and then transitioning to college, or working, and then the working adult, or the retired adult, or older adult.

After we think about groups and social supports, then we wanna think about what else may be going on in the person's life that they may benefit from regarding counseling, mental health counseling. Are there any issues, barriers,  any areas in which they need to enhance or improve their coping mechanisms, coping and to enable them to feel and live a much more fulfilled life.

And that varies. In different degrees as well from maybe what does relationships look like for me as a blind person, or, uh, what does it mean if my partner leaves and I'm completely reliant on them because I'm blind or visually impaired and I were to be living alone. What would life be like? They're no different than someone who is sighted.

They just learn things differently, but the capabilities are still there.  The roadmap would first to be beginning on the onset of diagnosis would be counseling to explore the feelings that one is experiencing and to be open to the possibilities, right? To open their mind to the possibilities of what life can be now.

It's an adjustment process. It's a sensory.  That was lost, and we don't realize how dependent we are on our senses until we lose one, even if it would be one like taste, you know, when you get sick, you don't realize how important taste is until you lose it. So, it's the same thing, and it would be an adjustment process to that.

So, I would say counseling would be find somebody to talk to. From that point. The next step would be what are the options for you in order to move forward in your life with whatever your goals are, right? So that in through the talk,  talk therapy or counseling, you'll be able to also not only process what you're currently feeling, but what are your hopes and dreams?

What would you like to do getting you connected to what you need? in order to take those steps to attain the goals that one has created for themselves. Staying connected to supports and people who have similar experiences helps to normalize what you are going through. And it decreases isolation because most tend to isolate on the onset of, um, the diagnosis.

Most of us, when we deal with trauma, Often feel alone, right? I'm the only one going through this. And so getting connected to social groups. Um, that or peer led groups that show that the possibilities are endless, and it's really up to the individual, um, provides hope. Then after that would be, it would require the participant to be an active person in attaining their goals, because you could get connect.

We could connect it to all the resources in the world, but if you're unwilling  to take the steps to get connected to those services, then they're useless. All those resources are useless. So you have to be an active participants in this, in the process of it all,  getting connected to the things that are going to help you live  a more independent life.

So whether that be, you know, receiving assistive technology or, uh, you know, vision rehab therapy or orientation and mobility to help you get around and navigate through your, um, personal environment, but as well as work environment. It's very important for a person who is visually impaired to have things in the same place,  right?

So if you always know that your, um, you know, pen holder, right, is always to the left, or if you always know that your mouse when you're working on the computer is always to the right, If you always know that your glass of water, you know, is at the center of your desk console, these things are easier for them.

It helps them navigate the world much more easily. So routines are important or, you know, leaving things in places where people leave them.  Having organization for a person who is visually impaired is much more critical. Then it is for the average sighted person, even though we all lose things, even as sighted people.

So organization is always wonderful to have, but it's much more important for the person who is visually impaired or blind, because going back to that space and knowing that their keys are going to be there, their wallet is going to be there, or even the juice, you know, in the fridge is on the, on the second.

Um, shelf as opposed to the milk is on the first or something to that effect so they can serve their own cup of water or juice of milk or whatever. So creating those sort of routines and organizations is important. And then, you know, the sky's the limit, implementing what it is that you've learned to live this independent life and attaining your goals.

I would say that would be the best roadmap for someone who's visually impaired. New York state commission for the blind  is an agency that acts as a hub. They want to make sure that the person who is blind or visually impaired is connected to all the services that they need.  So, they are not the ones that are actually providing the service.

They're overseeing the services that are being provided. They are contractually connected to the community organizations that provide the service. So that's their role in, in working with the blind individual. So it's really the community based organizations, or as we call CBOs.  That are providing the services.

So New York state commission for the blind doesn't provide counseling. It is the community based organization that they are contracted with, that they refer the blind individual to that will provide the counseling.  So we provide counseling commission. Doesn't they have a commission counselor that they go to, obviously that they establish a relationship with and, you know, trust and rapport.

But they're not really counselors. Like a therapist. Like a clinician that you would go to for mental health services if someone is expressing being work readiness. Right. They're ready to return to work.  'cause we're assuming that we're working with somebody that's not working right. So someone who's re ready to return to work.

What we would do is we would just share that information with the commission counselor, and we'd share that information with our colleagues internally saying we're working with John Smith. And John has expressed being ready to return to work. Um, you know, and then we would record they, they would move on with the certain.

Request for services through the New York state commission for the blind that they would need in order to do a job assessment. Maybe work readiness training to see where the person is.  See if the person needs any assistive technology training in order to prepare them depending on what it is that they want to do. 

Uh, you know, just taking those steps needed to ensure or increase their viability for employment and success in staying gainfully employed after. Sometimes someone will be referred to workforce department, like you spoke to my colleague Khadijah.  And they won't be referred to social work. Workforce department  will speak with the person and they will notice that they have certain worries.

about returning to work that seemed to be a barrier  for them to be able to maybe sit through a, um, an interview,  or they'll share things like, I'm worried about if I get a job, whether I'm going to do good, even though I want to work, but I'm really worried whether I'm going to fail or not. They, they know.

That at that point, these are certain words that sort of trigger to refer them to social work so that we can work on them with counseling  and providing that clinical component to sort of get them to the next step or to work through. the anxieties, the worries, the apprehensions that they may feel regarding either returning to work or working for the first time.

Because as I said earlier, we do work with, uh, the teenagers who are transitioning from high school into college. Some of them have decided maybe they're not ready for college and just want to go straight into work. That's how some of the cross-referencing, I'm sorry, cross-referrals happen within the organization.

So it depends. And somebody could actually still be working or have gotten a job. They've attained the job, but now they're at the job and they are second guessing themselves. That sometimes happens as well. And so we start to meet with them for counseling to address whatever their concerns are in the moment.

The most common reasons for family counseling is the blind individual wants  Or desires a certain level of independence that the family member or members or caregiver don't seem to agree on their ability or are overly concerned about their safety. And so they impede on the blind person's ability to thrive, to live independently, to try.

And there's a common social work term for all social workers, and that is. As human beings, we all have the dignity and the risk of failure. Even though none of us intend on failing, it is our human right to try something and fail. And through that process is when we usually learn about the world and ourselves. 

And so for the blind individual, as I said earlier, they learn differently and they become sometimes too dependent. on family members who for all intents and purposes, we're saying a very caring, very loving, very guiding. But sometimes the level of care is too high that it impedes that person's ability to live the life that they want to live and experience independence. 

A common occurrence in households that have more than one child. If there's a blind child and a sighted child. Most times you will go into the home and you would see the sighted child, you know, maybe perhaps making their own lunch or snack, right? A sandwich, but the blind child. Is served their snack or, or, or lunch.

And so the question then becomes, why can't John make his own snack on his own sandwich? It's just a sandwich. Well, I never thought about it before. It's usually the common response of the family member.  Well, you won't know until you let John try to make his own sandwich,  as long as the things that he needs are in the same place. 

The bread, the cheese, whatever cold cuts you use, he should be able to make his own sandwich. I had a 13 year old that I was providing counseling to. She just wanted to have  a space, uh, to meet with her friends virtually.  And her mother was completely 100 percent against it because she didn't trust the virtual platforms, their safety.

She feels like she would be taken advantage of. And I said, if she was 13 and sighted, Would she have access to these things already? Probably so because she probably would have been able to learn how to navigate that on her own when she was about five. I think five year olds learn how to navigate at this point, virtual platforms.

She's 13,  right? So, you know, there's, there's a way to meet the teenager in the middle, right? Working with the parent on how to set parental controls, you know, how to set healthy boundaries. What are ways to give this child some privacy and build trust  to say that if something did occur, they would share that with you and give them the space to, you know, prove you wrong in a sense. 

And then address it when that time occurs. So these are some things that also occur as well. There's sort of letting the blind individual develop as a normal teenager would.  Pre vocational groups, meaning this is usually your teenagers who are transitioning from high school to college and they're thinking about what are the next steps in their life. 

That's some of the groups that we, um,  we provide support to there's a living with blindness group that occurs with  participants who attend our programs that are provided at the Vision Center for Blindness in Spring Valley,  and we have a parenting journey that we are.  In the process of recruiting for and we'll beginning hopefully in, in the,  in the summer, early summer for parents, um, of blind  individuals, children, uh, to give them a space to talk about their experiences. 

And that group should occur virtually. But there's also a summer program that happens, um, at the VCB  for three weeks.  Um, each week, a different cohort of families come to the VCB in Spring Valley, and they stay there for five days, and there's different groups that are provided there, some for the family and some for the participants. 

My suggestion would be to also reach out to my colleague, Jennifer.  Um, she is the director of the VCB, the Vision Center  for Blindness in Spring Valley. That is a beautiful 32 acre campus where they do a lot of, um, O& M instruction, a lot of assistive technology instruction. Um, people stay there for their programs, like overnight some, they have a 60 day programs.

They have 15 week programs. For students,  so that would be another place to visit as well. And then. Last, but not least, there's cellist manner. So, this manner is the, it's on what's 23rd street. It's the only building in New York City that houses people who are blind to visually impaired.  As a sighted person, um, for me, the, the one thing that I also learned is that it's okay to use the words like, I see, you know, or, you know, some people feel, um, and I did initially when I began working in this, in this, with this specific population,  um, where we become sort of apprehensive, if there's certain words that might be.

Um,  disrespectful or, um,  what's another word? Um, that's the word inconsiderate. Um, and, and I, those, they're not, they don't think of it that way. Aside, you know, as a person who was blind or visually impaired, they don't think of it that way. I would say the only thing. Two things to remember for somebody who was blind to visually impaired is one, their cane,  uh, their white cane that they utilize for  ambulation, right.

To walk around, to get around, uh, is called a cane and not a walking stick.  And so that was, would be one that I would be keep people mindful of. And if you ever saw a blind person,  um, who needed assistance,  The best thing or best approach would be to all to ask if they are in need of assistance and offer for them to take your arm as opposed to you taking theirs. 

So, if I was blind or visually impaired and someone were to come up to me, and let's say I look like I'm having trouble crossing the street, I'm a little scared or worried or something to that effect. The best approach would be to come up and offer. You know, may I help you go across the street? Wait for me to say yes or no, and then tell me, okay, you can reach from my, my arm to your left. 

And then I would hold on to the person's arm as they guide me across the street.  If you wanted to use a visual aid to see what things look like, um, we did, um, I did, I completed recently a certification program with Mississippi state. Um, they have, uh, blind,  we had to do a lesson ourselves in, uh, what would it feel like to be blind or visually impaired?

And 1 of them was to just, like, go to a cheap, um,  store where they sell eyeglasses, like a Dollar Tree or something and take clear nail polish. And, and cover the lenses with the clear nail polish and have someone wear them and then try to do something like make a sandwich or serve a glass of water, uh, and to see how it's not as easy,  um, as we think and how much we rely on our vision and we don't really even know it,  um, even, you know, balance sometimes.

You know, sometimes we feel like we have to kind of keep our hands out in front of us. The other would be blindfolded, but that I think that that, you know, there are different light perceptions that people can have. And so it's not just about being totally blind, but it's also about, you know, what if you can see, but you can only see blurred shapes.